'\" -*- coding: us-ascii -*-
.if \n(.g .ds T< \\FC
.if \n(.g .ds T> \\F[\n[.fam]]
.de URL
\\$2 \(la\\$1\(ra\\$3
..
.if \n(.g .mso www.tmac
.TH "gabpbx " 8 2011-02-08 "gabpbx 1.8" ""
.SH NAME
gabpbx
\- All-purpose telephony server. 
.SH SYNOPSIS
'nh
.fi
.ad l
\fBgabpbx\fR \kx
.if (\nx>(\n(.l/2)) .nr x (\n(.l/5)
'in \n(.iu+\nxu
[\fB-BcdfFghiImnpqRtTvVW\fR] [\fB-C \fR\fIfile\fR] [\fB-e \fR\fImemory\fR] [\fB-G \fR\fIgroup\fR] [\fB-L \fR\fIloadaverage\fR] [\fB-M \fR\fIvalue\fR] [\fB-U \fR\fIuser\fR] [\fB-s \fR\fIsocket-file\fR]
'in \n(.iu-\nxu
.ad b
'hy
'nh
.fi
.ad l
\fBgabpbx -r\fR \kx
.if (\nx>(\n(.l/2)) .nr x (\n(.l/5)
'in \n(.iu+\nxu
[\fB-v\fR] [\fB-d\fR] [\fB-x \fR\fIcommand\fR]
'in \n(.iu-\nxu
.ad b
'hy
'nh
.fi
.ad l
\fBgabpbx -R\fR \kx
.if (\nx>(\n(.l/2)) .nr x (\n(.l/5)
'in \n(.iu+\nxu
[\fB-v\fR] [\fB-d\fR] [\fB-x \fR\fIcommand\fR]
'in \n(.iu-\nxu
.ad b
'hy
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBgabpbx\fR is a full-featured telephony server which
provides Private Branch eXchange (PBX), Interactive Voice Response (IVR),
Automated Call Distribution (ACD), Voice over IP (VoIP) gatewaying, 
Conferencing, and a plethora of other telephony applications to a broad
range of telephony devices including packet voice (SIP, IAX2, MGCP, Skinny,
H.323, Unistim) devices (both endpoints and proxies), as well as traditional TDM
hardware including T1, E1, ISDN PRI, GR-303, RBS, Loopstart, Groundstart,
ISDN BRI and many more.
.PP
At start, GABpbx reads the /etc/gabpbx/gabpbx.conf main configuration
file and locates the rest of the configuration files from the configuration
in that file. The -C option specifies an alternate main configuration file.
Virtually all aspects of the operation of gabpbx's configuration files
can be found in the sample configuration files. The format for those files
is generally beyond the scope of this man page.
.PP
When running with \fB-c\fR, \fB-r\fR or \fB-R\fR
options, GABpbx supplies a powerful command line, including command
completion, which may be used to monitors its status, perform a variety
of administrative actions and even explore the applications that are
currently loaded into the system.
.PP
GABpbx is a trademark of Digium, Inc.
.SH OPTIONS
Running GABpbx starts the gabpbx daemon (optionally running it
in the foreground). However running it with \*(T<\fB\-r\fR\*(T> or
\*(T<\fB\-R\fR\*(T> connects to an existing GABpbx instance through
a remote console.
.TP 
-B
Force the background of the terminal to be black, in order for
terminal colors to show up properly. Equivalent to
\*(T<\fBforceblackbackground = yes\fR\*(T> in
\*(T<\fIgabpbx.conf\fR\*(T>. See also
\*(T<\fB\-n\fR\*(T> and \*(T<\fB\-W\fR\*(T>.
.TP 
-C \fIfile\fR
Use \*(T<\fIfile\fR\*(T> as master configuration file
instead of the default, /etc/gabpbx/gabpbx.conf
.TP 
-c
Provide a control console on the calling terminal. The
console is similar to the remote console provided by
\*(T<\fB\-r\fR\*(T>. Specifying this option implies 
\fB-f\fR and will cause gabpbx to no longer 
fork or detach from the controlling terminal. Equivalent 
to \*(T<\fBconsole = yes\fR\*(T> in \*(T<\fIgabpbx.conf\fR\*(T>.
.TP 
-d
Enable extra debugging statements. This parameter may be used several
times, and each increases the debug level. Equivalent to \*(T<\fBdebug = \fR\*(T>\fInum\fR
in \*(T<\fIgabpbx.conf\fR\*(T> to explicitly set the initian debug
level to \fInum\fR. When given at startup, this
option also implies \*(T<\fB\-f\fR\*(T> (no forking). However when
connecting to an existing GABpbx instance (\*(T<\fB\-r\fR\*(T> or
\*(T<\fB\-R\fR\*(T>), it may only increase the debug level.
.TP 
-e \fImemory\fR
Limit the generation of new channels when the amount of free memory 
has decreased to under \fImemory\fR megabytes.
Equivalent to \*(T<\fBminmemfree = \fR\*(T>\fImemory\fR in
\*(T<\fIgabpbx.conf\fR\*(T>.
.TP 
-f
Do not fork or detach from controlling terminal. Overrides any
preceding specification of \fB-F\fR on the command line.
Equivalent to \*(T<\fBnofork = yes\fR\*(T> in \*(T<\fIgabpbx.conf\fR\*(T>.
See also \*(T<\fB\-c\fR\*(T>.
.TP 
-F
Always fork and detach from controlling terminal. Overrides any
preceding specification of \fB-f\fR on the command line.
May also be used to prevent \*(T<\fB\-d\fR\*(T> and \*(T<\fB\-v\fR\*(T> to imply
no forking. Equivalent to \*(T<\fBalwaysfork = yes\fR\*(T> in \*(T<\fIgabpbx.conf\fR\*(T>.
.TP 
-g
Remove resource limit on core size, thus forcing GABpbx to dump
core in the unlikely event of a segmentation fault or abort signal.
\fBNOTE:\fR in some cases this may be incompatible
with the \fB-U\fR or \fB-G\fR flags.
.TP 
-G \fIgroup\fR
Run as group \fIgroup\fR instead of the
calling group. \fBNOTE:\fR this requires substantial work
to be sure that GABpbx's environment has permission to write
the files required for its operation, including logs, its comm
socket, the gabpbx database, etc.
.TP 
-h
Provide brief summary of command line arguments and terminate.
.TP 
-i
Prompt user to intialize any encrypted private keys for IAX2
secure authentication during startup.
.TP 
-I
Enable internal timing if DAHDI timing is available.
The default behaviour is that outbound packets are phase locked
to inbound packets. Enabling this switch causes them to be
locked to the internal DAHDI timer instead.
.TP 
-L \fIloadaverage\fR
Limits the maximum load average before rejecting new calls. This can
be useful to prevent a system from being brought down by terminating
too many simultaneous calls.
.TP 
-m
Temporarily mutes output to the console and logs. To return to normal,
use \fBlogger mute\fR.
.TP 
-M \fIvalue\fR
Limits the maximum number of calls to the specified value. This can
be useful to prevent a system from being brought down by terminating
too many simultaneous calls.
.TP 
-n
Disable ANSI colors even on terminals capable of displaying them.
.TP 
-p
If supported by the operating system (and executing as root),
attempt to run with realtime priority for increased performance and
responsiveness within the GABpbx process, at the expense of other
programs running on the same machine.

Note: \fBastcanary\fR will run concurrently with
\fBgabpbx\fR. If \fBastcanary\fR stops
running or is killed, \fBgabpbx\fR will slow down to
normal process priority, to avoid locking up the machine.
.TP 
-q
Reduce default console output when running in conjunction with
console mode (\fB-c\fR).
.TP 
-r
Instead of running a new GABpbx process, attempt to connect
to a running GABpbx process and provide a console interface
for controlling it.
.TP 
-R
Much like \fB-r\fR. Instead of running a new GABpbx process, attempt to connect
to a running GABpbx process and provide a console interface
for controlling it. Additionally, if connection to the GABpbx 
process is lost, attempt to reconnect for as long as 30 seconds.
.TP 
-s \fIsocket file name\fR
In combination with \fB-r\fR, connect directly to a specified
GABpbx server socket.
.TP 
-t
When recording files, write them first into a temporary holding directory, 
then move them into the final location when done.
.TP 
-T
Add timestamp to all non-command related output going to the console
when running with verbose and/or logging to the console.
.TP 
-U \fIuser\fR
Run as user \fIuser\fR instead of the
calling user. \fBNOTE:\fR this requires substantial work
to be sure that GABpbx's environment has permission to write
the files required for its operation, including logs, its comm
socket, the gabpbx database, etc.
.TP 
-v
Increase the level of verboseness on the console. The more times
\fB-v\fR is specified, the more verbose the output is.
Specifying this option implies \fB-f\fR and will cause
gabpbx to no longer fork or detach from the controlling terminal.
This option may also be used in conjunction with \fB-r\fR
and \fB-R\fR.

Note: This always sets the verbose level in the gabpbx process,
even if it is running in the background. This will affect the size
of your log files.
.TP 
-V
Display version information and exit immediately.
.TP 
-W
Display colored terminal text as if the background were white
or otherwise light in color. Normally, terminal text is displayed
as if the background were black or otherwise dark in color.
.TP 
-x \fIcommand\fR
Connect to a running GABpbx process and execute a command on
a command line, passing any output through to standard out and
then terminating when the command execution completes. Implies
\fB-r\fR when \fB-R\fR is not explicitly
supplied.
.TP 
-X
Enables executing of includes via \fB#exec\fR directive.
This can be useful if You want to do \fB#exec\fR inside
\*(T<\fIgabpbx.conf\fR\*(T>
.SH EXAMPLES
\fBgabpbx\fR - Begin GABpbx as a daemon
.PP
\fBgabpbx -vvvgc\fR - Run on controlling terminal
.PP
\fBgabpbx -rx "core show channels"\fR - Display channels on running server
.SH BUGS
Bug reports and feature requests may be filed at https://issues.gabpbx.org
.SH "SEE ALSO"
http://www.gabpbx.org - The GABpbx Home Page
.PP
http://www.gabpbxdocs.org - The GABpbx Documentation Project
.PP
http://wiki.gabpbx.org - The GABpbx Wiki
.PP
http://www.digium.com/ - GABpbx is sponsored by Digium
.SH AUTHOR
Mark Spencer <markster@digium.com>
.PP
Countless other contributors, see CREDITS with distribution for more information.
